----------------------------------------------------------------
			ESMERALDA Version 1.0

Primary Authors:	Gernot A. Fink, Thomas Plötz
Current Affiliation:	Robotics Research Institute,
			University of Dortmund, Germany
			www.is.irf.de
----------------------------------------------------------------

ESMERALDA --
an integrated Environment for Statistical Model Estimation and
Recognition on Arbitrary Linear Data Arrays -- is a development
toolkit for building statistical recognizers operating on
sequential data as e.g. speech, handwriting, or biological
sequences. ESMERALDA primarily supports continuous density Hidden
Markov Models (HMMs) of different topologies, and with user-definable
internal structure. In order to represent long-term sequential
restrictions HMMs can be complemented with Markov chain models
(realized as statistical N-gram models). Gaussian mixture models
(GMMs) can also be used independently for general classification
tasks.

The goal of the ESMERALDA system is to put together a tractable set of
conceptually simple yet powerful techniques in an integrated
development environment. The architecture of the system is organized
around an incremental recognizer. Separate modules for estimating
mixture density models in conjunction with HMMs and for building
n-gram language models are provided. Technically, every module
contains a library with an API as well as stand-alone programs for
manipulating the appropriate models and assiciated data.

The three fundamental modules, namely for mixture densities, HMMs and
N-gram models provide the following methods:
- Mixture densities: k-means and LBG-based unsupervised mixture
estimation respectively, expectation maximization based model
training, maximum a-posteriori adaptation, estimation of linear
feature space transforms (PCA, LDA), efficient two-stage decoding
- HMMs: declarative configuration language for building structured
models from elementary units, initialization, training based
on Baum-Welch reestimation, efficient Viterbi beam-search decoding,
(semi-)supervised model adaptation (MLLR/MAP)
- N-gramm: memory efficient estimation of N-gram statistics, N-gram
estimation based on different smoothing techniques (most notably
absolute discounting and backing-off/interpolation), efficient
decoding of long-span models

ESMERALDA was successfully applied to a number of challenging
recognition problems in the field of automatic speech recognition,
offline handwriting recognition and protein sequence analysis. 

INSTALLATION
------------

In order to get ESMERALDA up and running in the following the necessary
steps are described (for Linux operating system):

  0.1	Create a master directory, e.g. '/vol/esmeralda', and there
	sub-directories 'src,bin,lib,include' and 'man';

  0.2	Set the environment variable ESMERALDA=/vol/esmeralda
	(and optionally also set the path to include $ESMERALDA/bin)

  0.3	Set the environment variable ARCH=linux
	(this controls some operating system / architecture specific
	 settings in $ESMERALDA/src/Makerules)

  0.4	Set the environment variable POSIXLY_CORRECT=1
	(Important for Linux: Otherwise Linux sorts command lines such
	 that options will be shuffled to the beginning. As, however,
	 tools like 'isr' or 'md_param' use complex command lines with
	 several option sections they will not work porperly and generate
	 strange sounding error messages related to option processing)


  1.1	Unpack the sources in $ESMERALDA/src

	ATTENTION:
		The individual modules in $ESMERALDA/src only build on
		top of each other. However, during development they are
		completely independent. Therefore, when installing ESMERALDA
		for the first time - unfortunately - a simle 'make' in
		$ESMERALDA/src is not sufficient as the libraries of the
		required modules were not installed yet. If everything
		is set up properly, a global 'make install' will, however, work.

  1.2	(just to make sure ;-) first try in the most elementary moduls 'rs' a

		make

	and in case of success a

		make install

	(will install 'librs.a' to $ESMERALDA/lib and several include
	 files to $ESMERALDA/include/rs)

  1.3	(if that worked out fine) bravely issue in $ESMERALDA/src a

		make install


  2.0.	In order to perform a first simle check whether everything worked
	out properly you can issue a call to the "incremental speech recognizer"

		isr -V

	which then will report it's current version number and the
	version number of all the (ESMERALDA) libraries it uses.

	This should look similar to

	isr version 2.96 (lm 2.12, grm 2.01c, md 2.01, dsp 1.60, mx 1.23c)
	usage: isr [<option> ...] <swu> <lex> <tree> [LM] [CL] [AA] [FE] [SR]


	Good Luck!

LICENSE
-------

ESMERALDA is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
version 2.1 of the License.

ESMERALDA is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA
